 Hey everybody, today I'm going to tell you what you need to know about major depressive disorder. What is it? Number one, number two, what do we do? What are our treatment options and there are a lot. So let's get going. I've got my DSM, my DSM. Okay. And so it says, if you have in trouble functioning your daily life and you've had at least five of these symptoms for more than two weeks, which is such a short period of time for the DSM because two weeks is not a long time. But you must have depressed mood and loss of interest or pleasure. You know I've talked about before like anhedonia, that's the word that we use for that number two, loss of pleasure or interest. You must have that as well as depressed mood to even be considered to have MDD. What are the symptoms that we may have and we have to have five or more? That's mood most of the day. That's number one. Number two, markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all or almost all activities. So that anodonia again. Number three is appetite disturbance. We either are eating more than normal or not as much as normal. Number four, hypersomnia or insomnia. I know you can see how these can vary, right? We're having a lot, we're eating too much, we're sleeping too much or we're not eating enough or we're not sleeping too much. It seems weird that they're in the same thing, right? No, because if you remember, we rewind back. I say, that you must represent a change from previous functioning. We're changing. If we didn't sleep much and now we're sleeping a lot, that's a change from previous functioning. If we ate a lot and now we're not eating much, that's a change. That's why these are put together in the same kind of thing, okay? Next, number five, psychomotor agitation or retardation. So that means we're either moving a lot or not moving much. It can be hard to get around, we can feel really sluggish or we can feel really anxious. Oh my god, I got to move, got things to do, either of those. Same type of thing, right? It's a change. Now, number six, fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day. Now, I would say that this one is the most common reason for people coming in to see their doctor. People who have MDD tend to run into their doctor first. You're like, I've been so tired and like, achy. I don't know what's going on with me. Now, number seven, feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt. Now, I hear from a lot of you that this is something that you struggle with. And I think the emphasis will be on inappropriate. So think about it. If this is something you're struggling with, is it warranted? Has something happened recently? Like, really happened a significant thing to warrant the amount of guilt, shame, whatever you're feeling? If not, you may want to talk to your doctor, see a therapist. Number eight, diminished ability to think or concentrate or indecisiveness. I made a video about, I don't know, two months ago, the most overlooked symptom of depression. This was it. Do you read, reread, do you watch TV and be like, I have no idea what just happened? Are you like my mother? You're like 45 minutes into a movie and you're like, I think I've seen this before. You may want to talk to your doctor. She really does that. It's really annoying. I love her, but hi mom. The last one, number nine, is recurrent thoughts of death. This is also one that we will definitely be like, maybe I should talk to somebody because I keep thinking about ending my life. And if you find yourself, let's say none of the others even resonated, but this one is really, it's just in your life all the time. Please reach out for help. Please call a suicide hotline. I have a whole page on my website no matter where you live or where you're from. Please call, get help, reach out. It's not all hopeless. You're not in a dark pit. People can help you and you can get out of it. I have a video also about creating a safety plan around that. Maybe I want to check that out as well. That's how we know if we have it. What do we do? We have medication options. Obviously, we talk a lot about, you know, antidepressants and people maybe like them or don't like them, but that's an option. That's something that you can talk to your doctor about and you can get help for. And know that you're not alone in this. This is very common. One in 10 American struggle with depression and females are more likely to have it than males. So remember that you're not alone. Aside from medication, there are therapy options. Obviously, talk therapy can be very beneficial for anyone struggling with depression. Just to have a place to vent, to get some reprieve, to get some extra support. And they say, and I'm going to read from this because I don't want to forget that before you even go in to see someone, try to learn as much about your depression as you can. Now, that sounds really weird. You're like, how much does learn about my depression? What are you talking about, Katie? You're losing your mind. No, it's good for you to know the severity, like on a scale of 1 to 10, how bad you feel it has been this week. The timing, does it come and go at certain times of year, certain times of day? Those are all important things to tell your therapist and your doctor. Also the duration in general. Because this day for months has it been here for years. Can you not remember the last time you didn't feel depressed? All of the things are very important. And it helps make sure that we get the proper diagnosis because it may not be depression. It may be something else, but we need to have all that information as clinicians to offer you the right treatment. And with that, under the talk therapy, CBT is also very helpful because there are a lot of behavioral changes that we can make. Like, I need to get outside and walk for 30 minutes. Lay out in the sun and just let it hit your face. I don't even care if it's winter. Because getting light, we know it could be very beneficial. Also spending time with friends, making yourself get up and shower during the day, making sure you're eating properly. All of those things can help with depression. And remember, you're not alone. There are so many people struggling. So please, please, please reach out for help the sooner the better. And if you like this type of video, give it a thumbs up and don't forget to subscribe because I've put out videos about three days a week. That's a lot. And you don't want to miss them. Leave your comments below because we're a community working together on our mental health. And something that you share may help someone else and spark them to reach out and get the help that they need. And that book is making me sweat. It's so hot in my house. Okay.

 We know that depression is frequently mentioned, discussed, and is often in the media. It's become known as the common cold of mental illness. With over 175 million reported sufferers worldwide, it's no wonder it has been cited by the World Health Organization as the leading cause of disability. If you want to learn more, the study and reference links will be in the description below the video. Major depressive disorder, or MDD, is perhaps the most severe type of depressive disorder. To qualify for a diagnosis, a number of official parameters must be satisfied as reviewed by a medical professional and, as per symptoms from the diagnostic and statistical manual, fifth edition, or DSM-5. The patient must have had a single depressive episode that has lasted for 14 consecutive days or more. Presented five out of eight symptoms listed in the DSM-5, and the episode must have caused significant distress and impairment to the sufferer. So, here are eight tell-tale signs to help you determine if you should ask your doctor about major depressive disorder. Disclaimer, please do not use this video to self-diagnose. If you can relate to most of these signs, we advise you to go to a qualified medical health professional for a proper diagnosis. 1. Persistent depressed mood Feeling depressed for most of the day for a period of at least two weeks solid is one of the key criteria for the diagnosis of MDD. This period is called a depressive episode, and it can be triggered by an upsetting event. There is also untriggering, but there is no clear reason for this occurring. If you are feeling unusually sad, hopeless, empty, and demotivated for weeks on end, this may be a clear sign of having a mood disorder. 2. Inability to feel pleasure What's an activity you do that always gives you joy? That's something that can make your whole day better. For me, it's that sweet, sweet unwrapping of a new game and watching the intro. So what's going on when you do your thing, but now you feel nothing. Unfortunately, this means, and Hadoinia has arrived. And Hadoinia is defined as the inability to feel pleasure, and it's one of the core characteristics of major depressive disorder. This means that on top of feeling depressed most of the time, with MDD, you're now also inconsolable. No event or gift can bring you up. The most you feel is flat. 3. Weight gain or loss The more common weight fluctuation with MDD sufferers is weight loss stemming from a reduced appetite. However, there is a specific subtype of MDD called MDD with atypical features, wherein the person will start overeating and gain weight instead. Either way, MDD is known to disrupt your normal eating patterns and may lead to unhealthy eating habits such as binge eating or self-starvation. 4. Insomnia or hypersomnia What's your sleep like? Are you good with 6 hours or do you NEED 8 hours to be functional? Whatever it is, as long as you feel rest and alert, that's fine. Everyone's personal, healthy sleep need is different. Unfortunately, MDD can frequently affect this too. Insomnia is constantly sleeping too little around 1-3 hours per night, despite wanting to sleep and having the time for it. The other side of this is hypersomnia, one of the signs of MDD with atypical features. You sleep more than 10 hours per night and still feel unrested and tired upon waking. 5. Overfatigue with loss of energy Do you feel exhausted all the time despite doing almost nothing every day? Do simple activities like brushing your teeth or seeing a quick hello? Feel like climbing a mountain! This kind of over fatigue and low energy is characteristic of those afflicted with major depressive disorder. Depression sufferers of many types typically have no drive to do anything and feel constantly tired despite doing nothing. The result is usually resignation, staying in bed all day and staring at nothing. 6. Self-realization of worthlessness and guilt We can all feel guilty at times and also very upset with ourselves for making mistakes. That's normal. However, has your self-esteem suddenly and dramatically plummeted? Do you feel rat with painful guilt at your smallest mistakes or even things not in your control? MDD makes regular guilt and self-checking into overwhelming emotions. Things like writing or speaking to a friend could be helpful. If they aren't, seeing a professional can let you know if there's something more serious behind it. 7. Difficulty thinking and concentrating This sign is likely a consequence of having low energy and little motivation to do anything. In simpler terms, since there's no motivation, you don't care enough about something to concentrate on it. These found that patients with MDD have poorer memory, become less focused and attentive, and have difficulty making decisions on their own. 8. Recurrent suicidal ideation Last on this list, but perhaps most seriously, those with MDD often have recurrent thoughts about suicide. Depression can feel so overwhelmingly torturous, isolating and dark that it may seem like the only way to stop the pain is to end the life living it. If you or someone you know is entertaining thoughts about committing suicide, even if there is no plan or previous attempts, this is still quite serious and it's important that it's taken that way. Depression may be seen as common, but that does not mean that it is in any way easy. Do you see yourself in any of these signs? Or does this information help to make sense of anything you've seen in others? Although it may not appear like it in the moment, with the proper help, things can and will get better. It is possible to alleviate the symptoms and live a fulfilling and meaningful life. There are resources and professionals to help. Knowing more about depression will encourage the understanding, patience, dedication, and support required to help either yourself or others. We here at Psych2Go are here to help spread that knowledge. Thank you for watching and learning. Please like, share, subscribe, and maybe reach out to a friend who needs you, even if that friend is yourself. See you in the next video!

